RFC: `AMLParser` UEFI service (#883)
OpenDevicePartnership/patina: docs/src/rfc/text/0017-aml-parser.md

without explicitly utilizing the existing `acpi` crate.
(`acpi` has MIT license, so it may be possible to borrow some snippets/implementations with proper attribution.)
   - Pros: Interfaces and implementations can be tailored to Patina needs.
   - Cons: Repeated work.
2. Design and implement the Rust AML service
while using the `acpi` crate as a dependency and parsing through its public interfaces.
(This may involve contributing to the `acpi` crate to improve its public interfaces.)
    - Pros: Less repeated code, especially for parsing.
    - Cons: `acpi` has limited public interfaces, which may constrain the development of the Rust ACPI service.
It primarily focuses on looking up and executing AML in the application space,
with less support for actually walking through and modifying the firmware-side AML object tree.

There is ongoing conversation with the owner of the `acpi` crate about
borrowing certain implementations and modifying the public interfaces
to be more friendly to the Patina ACPI implementation.
This conversation can be tracked through a [Github issue in the `acpi` crate](https://github.com/rust-osdev/acpi/issues/260).

> ## Rust Code

Reviewer: err... I realized after re-reading the introduction that this might already be in view with the mentioned `patina-acpi` crate as a future extension, so take this comment as a "I think we should build it that way to start with."

if the contents are modified by `set_option`.

Each handle stores the `parent_end` of its parent node, which is the parent's `size` + `offset` (useful for retrieving siblings).

Each handle also stores its own byte encoding, specifying its own layout:

```rust
#[derive(PartialEq, Eq, Hash)]
struct AmlByteEncoding {
    opcode: AmlOpcode,
    operands: Vec<AmlOperand>,
    attributes: AmlOpAttributes,
}

bitflags! {
    pub struct AmlOpAttributes: u32 {
        /// If opcode has a pkg_length field.
        const HAS_PKG_LENGTH  = 0x0000_0001;

        /// If opcode has children.
        const HAS_CHILD_OBJ   = 0x0000_0002;
    }
}

/// Represents the possible opcodes. 
pub enum AmlOpcode {
    BaseOp(BaseOpcode),
    ExtOp(ExtOpcode),
}

pub enum BaseOpcode {
    ZerOp,
    AliasOp,
    ...
}

pub enum ExtOpcode {
    MutexOp,
    EventOp,
    ...
}

pub enum AmlOperand {
    Opcode(AmlOpcode),
    Name(AmlNameString), // Represents a NameString (AML path). Not to be confused with a string literal 
    ...
}
```

### AML Trait Interface

The `AmlParser` service generally derives from the ACPI SDT protocol, and allows for traversal of the AML object tree.

```rust

> pub(crate) trait AmlParser {  

Reviewer 2: This feels, and as described, a direct derivation from the SDT protocol, which is obviously needed, though is a very C approach. For the Rust side, would it make sense to just return an iterator that does the get_child/get_sibling in the iteration itself? Feels like that would be more useful and safer. Then its debatable about whether you have an iter_mut that lets the caller directly change it or you force them to call set_option from the iter once they find what they want.

But, in general, trying to think about how we can ensure that this API is defined for a Rust interface and the C protocol is supported but not the primary interface driver.

  // The resulting handle is an opaque object on which further AML operations can be performed.
  // It points to the first (root) node in the AML stream.
  unsafe fn open_table(&self, table_key: TableKey) -> Result<AmlHandle, AmlError>;

  // Closes a handle for modification and traversal.
  // The handle will no longer be valid after it is closed.
  // Update the corresponding table's checksum if the handle is `modified`. 
  fn close_handle(&self, handle: AmlHandle) -> Result<(), AmlError>;

  // Iterates over the options (operands) of an opened AML handle.
  fn iter_options(&self, handle: AmlHandle) -> Result<Vec<AmlOperand>, AmlError>;

  // Sets the option (operand) at a particular index to the given value.
  fn set_option(&self, handle: AmlHandle, idx: usize, new_val: AmlOperand) -> Result<(), AmlError>;

  // Returns the first child of an AML node. 
  fn get_children(&self, handle: AmlHandle) -> Result<impl Iterator<AmlHandle>, AmlError>;

  // Returns the next sibling of an AML node.
  fn get_sibling(&self, handle: AmlHandle) -> Result<impl Iterator<AmlHandle>, AmlError>;

  // The above two functions are intended to provide a complete traversal implementation.

>   // For example, to get all the children of a node, find the first child through `get_child`, then use `get_sibling` on each subsequent child. In both cases, `None` indicates no child/sibling. 

Author: do you mean iterating the tree through something like a BFS/level traversal?

The implementation mirrors the ACPI SDT protocol’s functionality for AML traversal and patching
and is designed mainly for firmware use rather than OS-level interpretation.
It defines a structured system of AML handles for navigating AML streams and a trait-based `AmlParser` service for operations
such as opening tables, iterating operands, modifying values, and traversing child or sibling nodes.
The goal is to replace legacy C-based AML handling with a type-safe Rust service that supports ACPI 2.0+.
Future extensions may include extending this infrastructure for application-side AML interpretation 
within a `patina-acpi` crate.

## Change Log

- 2025-10-1: Initial RFC created.
- 2025-10-22: Update iteration interface and address prior art.
- 2025-10-28: Move to FCP.
- 2025-10-28: Add notes based on offline discussion of AML buffer parsing.

## Motivation

This RFC is an extension of the [ACPI service](0005-acpi.md).
Similar to the ACPI service, this Rust-based AML service will provide a safer and
more ergonomic interface for parsing and modifying AML bytecode.

## Technology Background

> AML bytecode is encoded mainly in the body of the DSDT and SSDT.

Reviewer 3: While the DSDT is a single table, a system can have zero, one, or multiple SSDTs.

```suggestion
Compiled ACPI tables such as the DSDT and SSDTs are composed of AML bytecode.

```

it also does not deal with firmware-side protocols or parsing.

This leaves two main paths for the Patina AML implementation:

1. Design and implement a new Rust AML service from the ground up,
without explicitly utilizing the existing `acpi` crate.
(`acpi` has MIT license, so it may be possible to borrow some snippets/implementations with proper attribution.)
   - Pros: Interfaces and implementations can be tailored to Patina needs.
   - Cons: Repeated work.
2. Design and implement the Rust AML service
while using the `acpi` crate as a dependency and parsing through its public interfaces.
(This may involve contributing to the `acpi` crate to improve its public interfaces.)
    - Pros: Less repeated code, especially for parsing.
    - Cons: `acpi` has limited public interfaces, which may constrain the development of the Rust ACPI service.
It primarily focuses on looking up and executing AML in the application space,
with less support for actually walking through and modifying the firmware-side AML object tree.

There is ongoing conversation with the owner of the `acpi` crate about
borrowing certain implementations and modifying the public interfaces

> to be more friendly to the Patina ACPI implementation.

Reviewer 3: Can you elaborate on what "more friendly to the Patina ACPI implementation" means in this context?

## Rust Code

### ACPI/AML Utility Crate

While the `AmlParser` service has functionality specific only to the UEFI ACPI SDT protocol,
it will be useful for extensibility to extract basic AML reading and patching capability into a separate utility crate,
`patina-acpi`. `AmlParser` will depend on this crate.

For example, basic parsing functionality like reading the package length, parsing name segments, etc.,
will be included in this utility crate.

Unlike the `AmlParser` struct, this crate will operate independently of the ACPI table system--
it does not directly deal with ACPI structures like the XSDT.
Instead, it receives a generic buffer that represents AML bytecode beginning at the start of some ACPI table.
The advantage of this paradigm is that this code can be reused for other parsing applications,
and can be reused partially *from* the existing Rust `acpi` crate.

This proposed `patina-acpi` utility crate crate shares functionality with the Rust  `os-dev acpi` crate; as such,
it remains to be seen if collaboration is possible to expose this shared parsing functionality,
or if `patina-acpi` will borrow/fork from `acpi`.

> ### AML Handles

Reviewer 3: I think that's better for lifetime tracking but also accounting for the fact that a mutable reference exists to that data.

`modified` ensures the corresponding table (which can be retrieved through `table_key`) has an updated checksum
if the contents are modified by `set_option`.

Each handle stores the `parent_end` of its parent node, which is the parent's `size` + `offset` (useful for retrieving siblings).

Each handle also stores its own byte encoding, specifying its own layout:

```rust
#[derive(PartialEq, Eq, Hash)]
struct AmlByteEncoding {
    opcode: AmlOpcode,
    operands: Vec<AmlOperand>,
    attributes: AmlOpAttributes,
}

bitflags! {
    pub struct AmlOpAttributes: u32 {
        /// If opcode has a pkg_length field.
        const HAS_PKG_LENGTH  = 0x0000_0001;

        /// If opcode has children.
        const HAS_CHILD_OBJ   = 0x0000_0002;
    }
}

/// Represents the possible opcodes. 
pub enum AmlOpcode {
    BaseOp(BaseOpcode),
    ExtOp(ExtOpcode),
}

pub enum BaseOpcode {
    ZeroOp,
    AliasOp,
    ...
}

pub enum ExtOpcode {
    MutexOp,
    EventOp,
    ...
}

pub enum AmlOperand {
    Opcode(AmlOpcode),
    Name(AmlNameString), // Represents a NameString (AML path). Not to be confused with a string literal 
    ...
}
```

### AML Trait Interface

> The `AmlParser` service generally derives from the ACPI SDT protocol, and allows for traversal of the AML object tree.

Reviewer 3: It's been mentioned elsewhere, but I'm not sure that the protocol interface should serve as the primary design point. That was a PI-spec C interface. For the purpose of the RFC, I'd consider inverting this. Define an independent, idiomatic Rust service interface and have the protocol be a wrapper around that.

```rust
pub(crate) trait AmlParser {  
  // Opens a table's AML stream for parsing. The table should be a DSDT or SSDT. 
  // The resulting handle is an opaque object on which further AML operations can be performed.
  // It points to the first (root) node in the AML stream.
  unsafe fn open_table(&self, table_key: TableKey) -> Result<AmlHandle, AmlError>;

  // Closes a handle for modification and traversal.
  // The handle will no longer be valid after it is closed.
  // Update the corresponding table's checksum if the handle is `modified`. 
  fn close_handle(&self, handle: AmlHandle) -> Result<(), AmlError>;

  // Iterates over the options (operands) of an opened AML handle.
  fn iter_options(&self, handle: AmlHandle) -> Result<Vec<AmlOperand>, AmlError>;

  // Sets the option (operand) at a particular index to the given value.

>   fn set_option(&self, handle: AmlHandle, idx: usize, new_val: AmlOperand) -> Result<(), AmlError>;

Reviewer 3: I know the "option" nomenclature comes from the SDT protocol but it seems out of place here. For example, what about something like `set_operand()`?
